# Chapter 24 Immunology

Metazoan animals and the cells within them are surrounded by a sea of pathogens — viruses, bacteria, and fungi — and have evolved a number of defenses to counter them, collectively termed the immune system. Immunity is a state of protection against the harmful effects of exposure to pathogens. Even insects such as Drosophila have an immune system with two types of defenses: (1) physical barriers and chemical defenses, and (2) cells that comprise an innate immune system that can recognize and destroy certain pathogens (Figure 24-1). Mechanical and chemical defenses operate continuously. Innate immune responses, which involve cells and molecules that are present in the body at all times, are rapidly activated (in minutes to hours). However, because they recognize molecules that are common to many foreign organisms, their ability to distinguish among different pathogens is somewhat limited.

In addition to these defense mechanisms, vertebrates have evolved a sophisticated immune system, the adaptive immune system, that can recognize and respond to many types of molecules not normally present in the body, including those that are parts of specific pathogens. The adaptive immune system generates secreted proteins termed antibodies, each of which binds to a specific foreign target molecule (see Figure 3-22).
The adaptive immune system also generates many types of cells that attack and destroy pathogenic invaders. Adaptive immune responses take several days to develop fully and are highly specific; that is, they can distinguish between closely related pathogens based on very small molecular differences in the structures of their proteins or other polymers. The adaptive immune system makes adjustments to these threats over time, changing in response to the types and abundances of pathogens to which the host is exposed.

All pathogens have found ways to disarm the immune system or manipulate it to their own advantage, and host-pathogen interactions are an evolutionary work in progress. Virtually all pathogens have relatively short generation times compared with the hosts they infect and thus can evolve sophisticated countermeasures against their hosts’ immune system. This explains why, despite the evolution of remarkably sophisticated adaptive immune systems, pathogenic viruses, bacteria, and parasites continue to pose a threat to human populations. Seasonal outbreaks of influenza caused by new strains of influenza virus are just one example.

These sophisticated defenses come at a price: an immune system capable of dealing with a massively diverse collection of rapidly evolving pathogens can sometimes mistake the host’s own tissues for pathogens and mount an attack
against its own cells and tissues, a phenomenon called autoimmunity. Even so, we have learned to exploit the workings of the immune system to create vaccines that protect against a variety of infectious diseases. Vaccines are remarkably cost effective and have contributed to eliminating the scourge of many epidemics, such as outbreaks of smallpox.

In this chapter, we deal mainly with the vertebrate immune system, with particular emphasis on those molecules, cell types, and pathways that uniquely distinguish the immune system from other types of cells and tissues. Four remarkable features characterize the vertebrate immune system. They are specificity, diversity, memory, and tolerance. Specificity is the immune system’s ability to distinguish between closely related substances. Diversity is the system’s capacity to specifically recognize an astoundingly large number (>106) of different molecules. Memory is a host’s ability to recall previously experienced exposure to a foreign substance and more rapidly and effectively defend itself from that substance the next time it is encountered. Tolerance is the ability to avoid mounting an immune-system attack against the host’s own cells and tissues; that is, the ability to distinguish the body’s own tissues (“self”) from foreign materials including pathogens (“nonself”).

Any material that can evoke an immune response is referred to as an antigen. As we shall see, the immune system achieves specificity and diversity by generating a large number of distinct proteins, such as antibodies and specific cell-surface receptors, each of which can bind very tightly to a target antigen such as a pathogenic molecule, but not to other, perhaps structurally very similar, molecules. Memory and tolerance depend on complex cellular systems. They are accomplished through the generation of a massively diverse set of cell-surface receptors that bind specific antigens. Cells that display these receptors have been “trained” so that they are largely unresponsive to self components (self-tolerant).

From a practical perspective, the powers of the immune system can be exploited therapeutically. Today there is a multibillion-dollar market for monoclonal antibodies, which are used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions, autoimmune diseases, and cancer. The molecules that constitute the adaptive immune system — antibodies in particular —are also indispensable tools for the cell biologist, as we saw in Chapters 3 and 4. Antibodies allow visualization and isolation of the molecules they recognize with pinpoint precision. Their ability to do so has been invaluable in the accurate description of the components that make up the cell and its organelles and their localization, both in cells and in tissues. The technique of immunofluorescence, for example, is widely used by cell biologists to study cell morphology and behavior, while immunoblotting (Western blotting) has become an indispensable tool in the study of signal transduction.

The ways in which these foreign materials are recognized and eliminated involve molecular and cell biological principles unique to the immune system. We begin this chapter with a brief sketch of the organization of the mammalian immune system, introducing the essential cell players in innate and adaptive immune responses and describing inflammation, a localized response to injury or infection that leads to the activation of immune-system cells and their recruitment to the affected site. In the next two sections, we discuss the structure and function of antibody (or immunoglobulin) molecules, which bind to specific molecular features on antigens, and how variability in antibody structure contributes to the recognition of specific antigens. The enormous diversity of antigens that can be recognized by the adaptive immune system finds its explanation in unique rearrangements of segments of DNA to generate antigen-specific receptors in B and T lymphocytes, commonly called B cells and T cells, which are the white blood cells that carry out antigen recognition. These gene rearrangements permit adaptation to a wide variety of pathogens by setting the specificity of antigen-binding receptors on lymphocytes; they also determine cell fate in the course of lymphocyte development.

Although the gene rearrangement mechanisms that give rise to antigen-specific receptors on B and T cells are very similar, the manner in which these receptors bind to (recognize) antigens is very different. The receptors on B cells — antibody molecules anchored in the plasma membrane — can interact with intact antigens directly, but the receptors on T cells cannot. Instead, as described in Section 24.4, the receptors on T cells recognize forms of antigen that are processed by target cells: small peptides and other small molecules that are displayed (or “presented”) on the surfaces of these cells by specialized cell-surface glycoproteins. These glycoproteins are encoded by genes in a region of the genome called the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). These MHC-encoded glycoproteins, also called MHC products, help determine the host’s ability to mount both T-cell and B-cell responses to antigens. Understanding these fundamental properties of the immune system has allowed us to answer a number of very practical questions: How can we best make antibodies that afford protection against an infectious agent? How can we raise antibodies to specific proteins we want to study in the laboratory? Knowledge of antigen processing and presentation thus informs both vaccine design to protect against infectious disease and the generation of tools essential for research. MHC-encoded glycoproteins also play a key role in an individual’s development of tolerance for his or her own antigens. We conclude the chapter with an integrated view of the immune response to a pathogen, highlighting the collaboration between different immune-system cells that is required for an effective immune response.
