# 5 Linkage, Recombination, and Eukaryotic Gene Mapping

Genes associated with variation in fear and aggression in dogs have been mapped to several specific chromosomal locations using genome-wide association studies. Pictured here is Molly, a dog that exhibited little fear and aggression.

Benjamin Pierce

## Mapping Fear and Aggression in Dogs

Our Labrador retriever, Molly, was the most laid-back dog I’ve ever known. Molly didn’t understand the definition of a stranger and greeted all visitors to our house with a vigorous wag of her tail. She was equally amiable toward other dogs. Confronted with an aggressive dog, she simply rolled over on her back. Nothing seemed to make her anxious or fearful. She even loved going to the veterinarian, where she greeted other dogs and the staff with great enthusiasm.

Not all dogs are so inclined, and indeed some breeds are consistently more aggressive and fearful than others. Fear and aggression have played important roles in dog evolution: compared to wild wolves, all domestic dogs have reduced aggression and fear toward humans, and early humans undoubtedly selected for tameness when they first domesticated dogs from their wolf ancestors some 30,000 years ago.

For many years, geneticists have been interested in the genetic underpinnings of behavioral traits like fear and aggression, not just in dogs but also in humans. This information could potentially be used to treat behavioral illnesses in humans that include fear, anxiety, and aggression. Unfortunately, studying the genetic basis of behavioral variation in humans is challenging because of the complexity of behavioral traits, long generation time, the inability to conduct controlled crosses, and small family size (see Section 3.5). Thus, geneticists have recently turned to dogs as a model for understanding how genes affect behavior.

In 2016, Isain Zapata and his colleagues published the results of a study that mapped genes affecting fear and aggression in dogs. To locate genes involved in these behaviors, they conducted a genome-wide association study in which they looked for statistical associations between behavioral traits among dogs from 11 breeds and 175,000 genetic markers called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced “snips”). Scattered across the genome, SNPs are positions at which individuals differ in a single nucleotide. (The details of locating genes with genome-wide association studies are discussed later in this chapter.) Genome-wide association studies in dogs are facilitated by the fact that dogs in different breeds are genetically distinct, while dogs within breeds are genetically similar.

What the researchers found was that fear in the dogs toward human strangers, as well as aggression toward unfamiliar dogs, was associated with genetic markers at two specific places in the genome: one spot on chromosome 18 and another on the X chromosome. Interestingly, aggression toward the dogs’ owners appeared to have a different genetic cause and was associated with different genes on chromosomes 15 and 34. The researchers were able to correlate these chromosomal locations to several known genes, some of which are expressed in those portions of the brain that are known to be associated with fear and aggression. These genes also showed signatures of strong past selection, suggesting that through artificial selection during dog domestication, humans helped shape the variation found today at these genes.

To validate their findings, the researchers conducted another study on a different cohort of dogs, and results confirmed their earlier finding of associations of loci on chromosomes 18 and X with fear and aggression directed toward strangers and other dogs. Finally, the researchers used their genetic results to create a model that, based on genetic makeup, could predict fear and aggression in dogs, and they tested this model in a third group of dog breeds. The model had a 58% success rate of predicting the level of fear and aggression observed in the dog breeds based on the particular genetic variants they possessed, versus a 7% random chance of success.

This chapter explores the inheritance of genes and genetic markers located on the same chromosome. These linked genes do not strictly obey Mendel’s principle of independent assortment; rather, they tend to be inherited together. This tendency requires a new approach to understanding inheritance and predicting the types of offspring that will be produced by a cross. A critical piece of information necessary for making these predictions is the arrangement of the genes on the chromosomes; thus, it will be necessary to think about the relation between genes and chromosomes. A key to understanding the inheritance of linked genes is to make the conceptual connection between the genotypes in a
cross and the behavior of chromosomes in meiosis.

We begin our exploration of linkage by comparing the inheritance of two linked genes with the inheritance of two genes that assort independently. We then examine how recombination breaks up linked genes. Next, we use our knowledge of linkage and recombination to predict the results of genetic crosses in which genes are linked as well as for mapping genes. Later in the chapter, we focus on physical methods of determining the chromosomal locations of genes. The final section examines variation in rates of recombination.

### 5.1 Linked Genes Do Not Assort Independently

Chapter 3 introduced Mendel’s principles of segregation and independent assortment. Let’s take a moment to review these two important concepts. The principle of segregation states that each diploid organism possesses two alleles at a locus that separate in meiosis, and that one allele passes into each gamete. The principle of independent assortment provides additional information about the process of segregation: it tells us that the two alleles at a locus separate independently of alleles at other loci.

The independent separation of alleles results in recombination, the sorting of alleles into new combinations. Consider a cross between individuals that are homozygous for two different pairs of alleles: AA BB×aa bb . The first parent, AA BB , produces gametes with the alleles A B , and the second parent, aa bb , produces gametes with the alleles a b , resulting in F1 progeny with genotype Aa Bb ( Figure 5.1 ). Recombination means that when one of the F1 progeny reproduces, the combination of alleles in its gametes may differ from the combinations in the gametes of its parents. In other words, the F1 may produce gametes with new allele combinations A b or a B in addition to parental gametes
A B or a b.

Mendel derived his principles of segregation and independent assortment by observing the progeny of genetic crosses, but he had no idea what biological processes produced these phenomena. In 1903, Walter Sutton proposed a biological basis for Mendel’s principles, called the chromosome theory of heredity, which holds that genes are found on chromosomes (see Section 3.2 ). Let’s restate Mendel’s two principles in relation to the chromosome theory of heredity. The principle of segregation states that a diploid organism possesses two alleles for a characteristic, each of which is located at the same position, or locus, on one of the two in meiosis, and each gamete receives one homolog. The principle of independent assortment states that in meiosis, each pair of homologous chromosomes assorts independently of other homologous pairs. With this new perspective, it is easy to see that, because the number of chromosomes in most organisms is limited, there are certain to be more genes than chromosomes, so some genes must be present on the same chromosome and should not assort independently. Genes located close together on the same chromosome are called linked genes and belong to the same linkage group . Linked genes travel together in meiosis, eventually arriving at the same destination (the same gamete), and are not expected to assort independently. All the characteristics examined by Mendel in peas did display independent assortment, and the first genetic characteristics studied in other organisms also seemed to assort independently. How could genes be carried on a limited number of chromosomes and yet assort independently?
