# SURGICAL SKIN PREPARATION AND DRAPING

The presurgical skin prep and draping procedures are methods used to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Bacteria colonize all layers of the skin and its appendages (e.g., sweat and sebaceous glands and hair follicles). Before surgery, the incision site and a wide area around it are cleansed or painted with an antiseptic to reduce the number of transient and normal microorganisms to an absolute minimum. After skin prep, the patient is covered with sterile drapes that expose only the surgical site and create the center of the sterile field. The skin prep and draping procedures described in this chap-
ter take place after the patient is positioned and immediately before surgery starts. Skin prep and draping are discussed together in this chapter because the events are sequential. The guidelines presented here are presented in a timewise and stepwise way to clarify who does what, and when.

## SECTION I: SURGICAL SKIN PREP

### PURPOSE OF THE SURGICAL SKIN PREP

Skin is the body’s primary defense against infection. A surgical incision provides an entry point for microorganisms. Healthy skin contains colonies of microorganisms, which compete with and usually overcome foreign or transient bacteria. When normal or transient bacteria are introduced into the surgical wound, they can cause an SSI. Skin can not be sterilized; however, the bacterial load can be reduced significantly with antiseptic cleansing or a coating of antiseptic on the skin.

### HAIR REMOVAL

Hair is not removed from the surgical site unless the surgeon determines that it will interfere with the surgical procedure. In this case it is clipped or removed with a chemical depilatory. In the past, the operative site was routinely shaved before surgery. Current research demonstrates that shaving the skin increases rather than decreases the risk of SSI. Shaving causes skin abrasions that may not be easily seen. These become a source of bacterial colonization by resident microbes, which are the most common source of SSI. Therefore, unless the patient’s hair cannot be kept outside the wound, it is not removed. This recommendation includes craniotomy and facial procedures in which the hair can be braided and secured away from the incision site with elastic bands or water-based gel.

Hair clipping requires a verbal or written order by the surgeon. The following guidelines must be followed for this procedure:

- Hair should be removed as close to the time of surgery as possible.
- Hair removal is performed in a nonsterile area.
- Hair is removed with single-use battery clippers or clippers with a head that can be resterilized.
- A chemical depilatory can be used only if the patient has had a skin test to ensure that he or she is not sensitive to the product. This test must be performed at least 12 hours 
before the start of surgery.
- Hair is removed in an area away from the location where surgery is performed.
- Single-use clippers must be discarded in a biohazard container after use.
- Eyebrows and eyelashes are never removed by other means because they may fail to regrow or may grow abnormally after removal.

### PREOPERATIVE SKIN MARKING

The Joint Commission Guidelines for Universal Protocol for preventing wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong person surgery require skin marking at the surgical site for procedures involving incisions, punctures, and insertions. This is to verify the side, levels (e.g., spinal location), and multiple sites such as fingers. The surgeon is required to mark the site before surgery so that the perioperative team can participate in the verification process from the time the patient arrives in the operating room until the start of surgery.

Surgeons use various types of pens for marking the site. The mark should be made with a surgical skin marker approved for this specific use. Gentian violet ink is the recommended and most effective product because it is antiseptic, does not wash off, and is easily visible. The mark should not be made with a ballpoint pen or other inks that are not approved for use on the patient’s skin. Nonsurgical inks can wash off during the skin prep, and some (e.g., felt marking pens used in labeling) are not FDA approved for use on skin. If the skin mark has not been made with gentian violet or other long-lasting dye, care must be taken not to wash the mark off during the prep. 

### URINARY CATHETERIZATION

Urinary catheterization is performed before the skin prep, unless the procedure requires the lithotomy position. In this case catheterization takes place immediately after the skin prep as part of the skin prep. 

Catheterization requires an order from the surgeon. The order may be written on the surgeon’s preference card and must include the type of catheter to be inserted and the date of the standing order.

Urinary catheterization is performed for specific surgical procedures and circumstances. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides the guidelines for appropriate use of indwelling urinary catheters in the perioperative setting. These are listed in Box 17.1.

#### SUPPLIES

The most common method of continuous drainage is a Foley urinary catheter (Fig. 17.1A). This is a retention catheter, which has a small inflatable balloon at the tip. After the catheter is inserted into the bladder, the balloon is inflated with sterile water to prevent the catheter from becoming displaced. The catheter is connected to a drainage tube and collection bag. Two common balloon sizes are the 5 mL and 30 mL. The 5 mL balloon is used for routine continuous drainage. The 30 mL balloon is used mainly for prostatectomy procedures.

A straight catheter, also called a red, Robinson, or intermittent catheter, is used to empty the bladder before surgery, but continuous urinary drainage is unnecessary (see Fig. 17.1B). Other types of urinary catheters are indicated for specific conditions and circumstances and are discussed in Chapter 24, Genitourinary Surgery.

Prepackaged sterile catheterization kits contain the supplies needed for catheterization. The correct catheter is selected based on the patient’s age, size, and gender. A size 14-to
16-French (Fr) Foley catheter generally is appropriate for a female patient; males usually require a 16-or 18-Fr catheter. Pediatric patients require considerably smaller sizes, and this should be assessed by qualified personnel.
The supplies for catheterization must be gathered, checked, and opened before the patient is positioned. A small catheterization table is prepared and moved into place immediately before the procedure.
The following supplies are included in a commercial kit. The catheter may or may not be included:

- Foley catheter according to size required
- Povidone prep solution (water base)
- Sterile lubricant
- Sterile gloves
- 10-mL
- syringe prefilled with sterile water
- Perineal drape
- Forceps
- Cotton balls to perform the prep
- Specimen cup with lid and labels
- Drainage tubing and a urine collection unit (may be pre-connected)

### PROCEDURE FOR CATHETERIZATION

Catheterization is performed only after the ACP has indicated that it is safe. A female patient is positioned with the knees slightly flexed and the hips externally rotated. The male patient is placed in the supine position.
The sterile technique required for catheterization requires the dominant hand to remain sterile while the nondominant hand is nonsterile. The dominant hand is used to perform the
skin prep and insert the catheter. The nondominant hand is used to stabilize the genitalia and expose the urethral meatus.
The dominant hand remains sterile and contacts only the sterile supplies and catheter.
If the dominant hand becomes contaminated, the procedure must be stopped and the contaminated glove changed. If the catheter becomes contaminated, a fresh sterile catheter
must be obtained. The following guidelines describe the step-by-step procedure for insertion of a Foley catheter. Step-by-step illustrations for catheterization are presented in Fig. 17.2 (female) and Fig. 17.3 (male).

## TECHNIQUE

1. Position the patient. If the female patient has not been prepped, an impervious sheet should be placed under the buttocks.
2. Check for body-piercing jewelry on the patient’s genitalia. All jewelry must be removed before catheterization. Jewelry is secured in a closed, labeled container and returned to the patient after surgery.
3. Don sterile gloves using the open gloving technique.
4. Moisten the prep sponges with antiseptic.
5. Place a small amount of lubricant gel in the tray or on the tip of the catheter.
6. Note that the drainage end of the catheter must be directed toward a receptacle before connecting it with the drainage system. Urine will begin to flow through the catheter when it is inserted correctly.
7. Do not test the balloon before insertion.
8. If the male patient is in the supine position, place one or more drapes to expose only the genitalia.
9. Female prep: With the nondominant hand, spread the labia, using the thumb and forefinger to form a C. Then, use the dominant hand to cleanse the genitalia. Grasp the prep sponge moistened with antiseptic with the sterile forceps. Cleanse the meatus and internal labia by drawing the cotton prep sponge downward from the superior apex of the labia majora to the anus. Drop this sponge into the kick bucket. Do not allow the sponge to touch the area just prepped. Repeat this process several times.
10. Male prep: With the nondominant hand, retract the foreskin and stabilize the penis just below the glans. Use the dominant hand to cleanse the penis. Grasp the prep sponge with the sterile forceps and, starting with the urethral meatus, draw it in a circular direction, widening the circle to include the outer portions of the glans. Do not draw the sponge back over the area just prepped. Discard the sponge and repeat this process several times.
11. Maintaining traction on the genitalia, grasp the insertion end of the catheter and lubricate the tip.
12. Guide the tip of the catheter into the urethra with slow, steady pressure. Do not force the catheter into the urethra.
